I thought we might talk about
when we first decided
the reinforcement
learning was the thing.
Did we ever decide that?
I'd like to talk about
those early days too
because there was
some striking things.
So Rich was my first
graduate student.
I want to tell you something
I don't think you know.
So Harry Cloth, who we
wrote about it in the book,
in a number of places,
but he created a contract at
UMass to see whether
his hypothesis about Hedonistic
Neurons made any sense.
So I was hired as a postdoc,
and Harry according
to Michael Herbet,
Michael was one of the
PIs on the contract.
Wasn't a grant, it
was a contract.
But Michael's memoirs which
have come out now said that
Harry required them
to bring euro-bond,
or they wouldn't get the funding.
You didn't know that. I
didn't know that either
until I read Michael's
[inaudible].
The difference between, I don't
think one reason we've
worked together so well.
I am by nature a risk
averse and Rich is a
risk seeking person.
I mean swims with sharks,
that's the farthest thing.
I think the risk aversion has a-
You're contrary.
You don't want to go in
the same direction as
all the other people.
Which means one thing,
that is that you as reinforcement
has been so popular,
you almost go on to
step aside, you are.
I go on and fill out on,
I'm ailing because I
can't keep up with
the literature to find a few that
is sparsely covered so that
I can make it contribute.
But now that I'm retired,
I'm not going in any orthogonal
direction at the moment,
I'm amazed with what
everybody is doing with
reinforcement matter,
and I'm thankful not to have
to be in the thick of things.
The industrial scale reinforced
and hence it's great stuff,
and it's just a flag of
interesting papers but
I'm not keeping up.
Well, I want to talk about
this topic, concerning
this risk-seeking.
You are the risk thing.
Well, that you left
your tenure-track position to
study field that was unpopular.
To be opposed, I don't recommend
leaving a tenure study.
To study a field
that was unpopular.
So I know you don't see this as
risk-seeking but I think
any other normal
human being would.
You wanted to pursue what
you thought was important.
Anyway, I don't want
to make it about you,
I want to make it
about the field.
So the field, well,
it wasn't interested in learning,
but I wanted
reinforcement learning
and supervised learning.
How in the 60s of
the first wave of neural
networks and machine learning,
it turned into
supervised learning.
For the early guys
in the 50s talked
about things that
were like reward,
but then they ended up
studying supervised learning.
So that's true.
That's happened over and over
again through all the waves.
There's always things coming up,
there's always a little
bit of supervised learning
versus reinforcement
learning that the-
Well, I've seen things in
the current literature
by sophisticated people
misunderstanding the
distinction between
error correction and
trial and error. It just-
Almost in the same way,
it's been misunderstood
throughout history.
Yeah, well.
Throughout three wave
[inaudible] since the 50s.
Yeah, that's true about it.
We were trying to obtain
with Harry's idea,
here is we're worth studying.
So we went back and
looked at everything,
and we discovered
real reinforcement learning
among some people.
But the field as a whole was
focused on supervised learning.
Those distinctions were not
being remembered by the people.
That was a real revelation.
I remember my first round of
talks back in those
days was about that.
There's trial and error learning,
it's not supervised learning.
So that's true.
It was a surprise.
So I wrote this AI
magazine article
recently that went through
some of the surprises,
and that was like number
one, that was wow.
This is actually a course
that appealed to me
because then maybe we could do
something innovative that
hadn't been done before.
Because most people
hadn't studied that,
except in engineering and in
statistical stochastic
control people and I
thought had been doing things
like this but it wasn't
AI community that
really latch onto that.
All the way I remember it,
we've looked through all
the different fields.
But we couldn't find
someone who studied
learning for to
optimize a signal.
For what?
To optimize a signal.
I except for the learning
on top of people.
Yeah.
Which nobody knew about.
Which was not associative.
Yeah, pretty much.
I mean there were a few
works with bandits.
But basically which you
came up dry or the
very few things,
and it was strength because
it's an important
kind of learning.
So it is just a strange fact
that these in reinforcement we
now see you like we're having
a second edition of
a textbook on it,
and we are having
a course all about
it and like it wasn't a thing.
In 1980, it wasn't a topic.
It was subsumed and swelled
up and obliterated,
could be seen because
of supervised learning.
But it also had
suggestions of behaviors.
Behaviors was bad.
Everybody knows behavior was bad
One of the most unfashionable
thing is around,
and so our report
line is behaviors and
then that includes elements
of behavior some but
not all of them.
We felt that people threw
the baby out of the bathwater by
rejecting common sense
reinforcement learning principles.
But even today, I mean
it's already prone to
new behaviors which is irritating
because all these models
and value functions and
all kinds of things
that pure behaviorists would just
not allow in interference.
So it's not behaviors.
Well, it's all about
what's going on
in the algorithms
inside the head.
I guess pure behaviorism.
While we may come to [inaudible]
that's in our head but
you can't observe behaviorist,
at least pure behaviors
when we cut into that.
But I learned a lot from
the pure behaviorists,
and I really it's a shame that
it just became unpopular.
That's much that's been lost,
all they have learned.
While the other hand it's
sort of given me like
a secret weapon because I can
understand what
behavior is learned.
So other people haven't
bothered to learn.
That's where temporal
difference learning came from.
Intrinsically
motivated persistence,
because throughout all of that,
there are periods
when there wasn't
an extrinsic source of
reward for the researchers.
But Jeffrey and I
think us and others
but I mean some
people would think
it's foolish to keep
studying the same thing.
Allen Newell gave a talk.
There's a video of that
and he characterized different
kinds of researchers.
I forget all the names
they gave him but there
were nomads, nomadic research.
So something hot pops up,
all the nomads move
over to that area,
study that for a while until
something else pops down,
and move over to that area.
I think we've been
the opposite of that.
I mean all sorts of
things that popped
up but we've ignored.
So that makes us the
old defining that is.
Yeah.
I don't know it's
contrary or stubborn or-
Well, I got interested
in intrinsic,
what psychologists gone
through as well they film her,
you do something
for its own sake,
rather than perform an
extrinsic reward of some kind.
I think it's very powerful,
I mean I've got actually
because I got and still think
it's a good way to
create subskills,
options or whatever you want
to call them from intrinsic.
They might be useful in the
future but they might not.
It's like basic research,
is intrinsically
motivated whether
there's utility or not,
and it turns out there has been,
it's incredible
utility but that was
not to drive imports as opposed
to explicitly project driven
and which are important
too but the intrinsic.
I think animals go through
intrinsically
motivated state where
they allow kinds of skills,
become competent at
dealing with their worlds.
Then when they have problems
that they have to solve,
they have an armament.
They have some skills that
they can bring to bear.
I think that's an
important principle,
and I think I've been
intrinsically
motivated with too for
these issues that now
are reinforcement
learning a set of ideas.
To me they're just interesting,
and the fact that they work is
a wonderful reward but that was
not the driving force
at least for me.
We've just had great success
in reinforcement learning
and I just want to
congratulate you and celebrate
with you and give you
like a high-five.